lib.path.subpath.{isValid,normalise}: init (#205190)
NixOS/nixpkgs: lib/path-design.md

- :heavy_minus_sign: `realpath --relative-to` doesn't output `./`'s
  - :heavy_plus_sign: We don't need to return the same result though

### Representation of the current directory
[curdir]: #representation-of-the-current-directory

Context: The current directory can be represented with `.` or `./` or `./.`

Decision: It should be `./.`

- :heavy_plus_sign: `./` would be inconsistent with [the decision to not have trailing slashes](#trailing-slashes)
- :heavy_minus_sign: `.` is how `realpath` normalises paths
- :heavy_plus_sign: `.` can be interpreted as a shell command (it's a builtin for sourcing files in bash and zsh)
- :heavy_plus_sign: `.` would be the only path without a `/` and therefore not a valid Nix path in expressions
- :heavy_minus_sign: `./.` is rather long
  - :heavy_minus_sign: We don't require users to type this though, it's mainly just used as a library output.
    As inputs all three variants are supported for relative paths (and we can't do anything about absolute paths)
- :heavy_minus_sign: `builtins.dirOf "foo" == "."`, so `.` would be consistent with that
- :heavy_plus_sign: `./.` is consistent with the [decision to have leading `./`](#leading-dots)

> 

Author: I'm gonna change the `any` to `every`

# Path library design

This document documents why the `lib.path` library is designed the way it is.

The purpose of this library is to process paths. It does not read files from the filesystem.
It exists to support the native Nix path value type with extra functionality.

Since the path value type implicitly imports paths from the "eval-time system" into the store,

> this library explicitly doesn't support build-time or run-time paths, including paths to derivations.

Author: Yes that's the implicit behavior I'm referring to. By build-time and run-time paths I mean paths that are accessed only at build-/run-time, such as `${pkgs.hello}/bin/hello` (could be at build-time or run-time, but not eval-time) or `/var/lib/someService` (could be at run-time, but not build- or eval-time).

I think it's important to mention this, but I'll rewrite this a bit

- `dirOf path` returns the path to the parent directory of `path`, unless `path` is the filesystem root, in which case `path` is returned
  - There can be multiple filesystem roots: `p == dirOf p` and `q == dirOf p` does not imply `p == q`
    - While there's only a single filesystem root in stable Nix, the [lazy trees PR](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/6530) introduces [additional filesystem roots](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/6530#discussion_r1041442173)
- `path + ("/" + string)` returns the path to the `string` subdirectory in `path`
  - If `string` contains no `/` characters, then `dirOf (path + ("/" + string)) == path`
  - If `string` contains no `/` characters, then `baseNameOf (path + ("/" + string)) == string`
- `path1 == path2` returns true only if `path1` points to the same filesystem path as `path2`

Notably we do not make the assumption that we can turn paths into strings using `toString path`.

## Design decisions

Each subsection here contains a decision along with arguments and counter-arguments for (+) and against (-) that decision.

### Leading dots for relative paths
[leading-dots]: #leading-dots-for-relative-paths

> Context: Relative paths can have a leading `./` to indicate it being a relative path, this is generally not necessary for tools though
> 
> Decision: Returned relative paths should always have a leading `./`

Reviewer: Context and Decision remind me of a format of parliamentary motions. You could succinctly summarize the most important positive argument(s) in between to make it complete.

```suggestion
Observing: Relative paths can have a leading `./` to indicate it being a relative path, this is generally not necessary for tools though

Considering: Paths should be as explicit, consistent and unambiguous as possible.

Decision: Returned relative paths should always have a leading `./`
```

Might save a couple of `<details>` clicks and bring a bit of order to the reasoning.

Author: Applied this format to all decisions

<details>
<summary>Arguments</summary>

- :heavy_plus_sign: In shells, just running `foo` as a command wouldn't execute the file `foo`, whereas `./foo` would execute the file. In contrast, `foo/bar` does execute that file without the need for `./`. This can lead to confusion about when a `./` needs to be prefixed. If a `./` is always included, this becomes a non-issue. This effectively then means that paths don't overlap with command names.
- :heavy_plus_sign: Prepending with `./` makes the relative paths always valid as Nix path expressions
- :heavy_plus_sign: Using paths in command line arguments could give problems if not escaped properly, e.g. if a path was `--version`. This is not a problem with `./--version`. This effectively then means that paths don't overlap with GNU-style command line options
- :heavy_minus_sign: `./` is not required to resolve relative paths, resolution always has an implicit `./` in front
- :heavy_minus_sign: It's more pretty without the `./`, good for error messages and co.
  - :heavy_plus_sign: But similarly, it could be confusing whether something was even a path
    e.g. `foo` could be anything, but `./foo` is more clearly a path

> - :heavy_plus_sign: Makes it more uniform with absolute paths (those always start with `/`)

Author: Not the case since we don't need to handle absolute path normalisation at all now

  - :heavy_minus_sign: Not relevant though, this perhaps only simplifies the implementation a tiny bit
- :heavy_plus_sign: `find` also outputs results with `./`
  - :heavy_minus_sign: But only if you give it an argument of `.`. If you give it the argument `some-directory`, it won't prefix that
- :heavy_minus_sign: `realpath --relative-to` doesn't output `./`'s
  - :heavy_plus_sign: We don't need to return the same result though

</details>

### Representation of the current directory
[curdir]: #representation-of-the-current-directory

> Context: The current directory can be represented with `.` or `./` or `./.`

Reviewer: Nix does not have a concept of current directory, except in the path expression parsing stage. This is transparent to anything written in the language.
We do need a term for the first argument of the path join operation or relative path resolution operation. In a web context, this would be the "base".
We could say that the _base_ of a Nix file is the directory that contains the file, for the purpose of resolving a path expression to a path value.
Similarly we could have `lib.path.join base subpath`.

```suggestion
Context: The relative path that produces the base can be represented with `.` or `./` or `./.`
```

We might want to start the document with a terminology section. That section should be clear of any design uncertainty. We can discuss decisions made in the terminology in one of these context / decision sections.

Author: Applied this with "base directory"

- :heavy_plus_sign: `.` would be the only path without a `/` and therefore not a valid Nix path in expressions
- :heavy_minus_sign: `./.` is rather long
  - :heavy_minus_sign: We don't require users to type this though, it's mainly just used as a library output.
    As inputs all three variants are supported for relative paths (and we can't do anything about absolute paths)
- :heavy_minus_sign: `builtins.dirOf "foo" == "."`, so `.` would be consistent with that
- :heavy_plus_sign: `./.` is consistent with the [decision to have leading `./`](#leading-dots)

</details>

### Relative path representation
[relrepr]: #relative-path-representation

Context: Relative paths can be represented as a string, a list with all the components like `[ "foo" "bar" ]` for `foo/bar`, or with an attribute set like `{ type = "relative-path"; components = [ "foo" "bar" ]; }`

Decision: Paths are represented as strings

<details>
<summary>Arguments</summary>

- :heavy_plus_sign: It's simpler for the end user, as one doesn't need to make sure the path is in a string representation before it can be used

>   - :heavy_plus_sign: Also `concatStringsSep "/"` might be used to turn a relative list path value into a string, which then breaks for `[]`

Author: I'll remove the "Instead, the library should be safe to use by design." since it's not part of the argument

- :heavy_plus_sign: It doesn't encourage people to do their own path processing and instead use the library
  E.g. With lists it would be very easy to just use `lib.lists.init` to get the parent directory, but then it breaks for `.`, represented as `[ ]`
- :heavy_plus_sign: `+` is convenient and doesn't work on lists and attribute sets
  - :heavy_minus_sign: Shouldn't use `+` anyways, we export safer functions for path manipulation

</details>

### Parents
[parents]: #parents

Context: Relative paths can have `..` components, which refer to the parent directory

> Decision: `..` path components in relative paths are not supported, nor as inputs nor as outputs.

Author: Sounds good, I'm now calling it "subpath" instead of "relative path" everywhere

> Decision: `..` path components in relative paths are not supported, nor as inputs nor as outputs.

Author: @fricklerhandwerk I think subpath should be fine if we just briefly define it in the design document.

<details>
<summary>Arguments</summary>

> - :heavy_plus_sign: It requires resolving symlinks to have proper behavior, since e.g. `foo/..` would not be the same as `.` if `foo` is a symlink.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- :heavy_plus_sign: If we'd want symlinks to behave according to the "physical" interpretation, it requires resolving symlinks, since e.g. `foo/..` would not be the same as `.` if `foo` is a symlink.
  - :heavy_plus_sign: The "logical" interpretation is also valid, and is used by some software. It is simpler and therefore perhaps more secure.
  - :heavy_plus_sign: Mixing both models can lead to surprises.
```

Reviewer 2: @roberth I suppose you meant this?

```suggestion
- :heavy_plus_sign: If we wanted symlinks to behave according to the "physical" interpretation, it would require resolving symlinks, since e.g. `foo/..` would not be the same as `.` if `foo` is a symlink.
  - :heavy_minus_sign: The "logical" interpretation is also valid, and is used by some software. It is simpler, and not using symlinks at all is safer.
  - :heavy_plus_sign: Mixing both models can lead to surprises.
```

Author: I inlined the explanations of those terms here for simplicity.

  - :heavy_plus_sign: We can't resolve symlinks without filesystem access
  - :heavy_plus_sign: Nix also doesn't support reading symlinks at eval-time
  - :heavy_minus_sign: What is "proper behavior"? Why can't we just not handle these cases?
    - :heavy_plus_sign: E.g. `equals "foo" "foo/bar/.."` should those paths be equal?
      - :heavy_minus_sign: That can just return `false`, the paths are different, we don't need to check whether the paths point to the same thing
    - :heavy_plus_sign: E.g. `relativeTo /foo /bar == "../foo"`. If this is used like `/bar/../foo` in the end and `bar` is a symlink to somewhere else, this won't be accurate
      - :heavy_minus_sign: We could not support such ambiguous operations, or mark them as such, e.g. the normal `relativeTo` will error on such a case, but there could be `extendedRelativeTo` supporting that
- :heavy_minus_sign: `..` are a part of paths, a path library should therefore support it
  - :heavy_plus_sign: If we can prove that all such use cases are better done e.g. with runtime tools, the library not supporting it can nudge people towards that

>     - :heavy_minus_sign: Can we prove that though?

Author: Yes, in derivations or at runtime

Decision: All functions remove trailing slashes in their results

<details>
<summary>Arguments</summary>

- :heavy_plus_sign: It enables the law that if `normalise p == normalise q` then `$(stat p) == $(stat q)`.
- Comparison to other frameworks to figure out the least surprising behavior:
  - :heavy_plus_sign: Nix itself doesn't preserve trailing newlines when parsing and appending its paths
  - :heavy_minus_sign: [Rust's std::path](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/path/index.html) does preserve them during [construction](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/path/struct.Path.html#method.new)
    - :heavy_plus_sign: Doesn't preserve them when returning individual [components](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/path/struct.Path.html#method.components)
    - :heavy_plus_sign: Doesn't preserve them when [canonicalizing](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/path/struct.Path.html#method.canonicalize)
  - :heavy_plus_sign: [Python 3's pathlib](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pathlib.html#module-pathlib) doesn't preserve them during [construction](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pathlib.html#pathlib.PurePath)
    - Notably it represents the individual components as a list internally

>   - :heavy_minus_sign: [Haskell's filepath](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/filepath-1.4.100.0) has [explicit support](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/filepath-1.4.100.0/docs/System-FilePath.html#g:6) for handling trailing slashes

Author: I feel like we can leave that one out, since it doesn't treat paths as strings, so there's no normalisation necessary. The normalisation is the type structure itself.

    - :heavy_minus_sign: Does preserve them for [normalisation](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/filepath-1.4.100.0/docs/System-FilePath.html#v:normalise)
  - :heavy_minus_sign: [NodeJS's Path library](https://nodejs.org/api/path.html) preserves trailing slashes for [normalisation](https://nodejs.org/api/path.html#pathnormalizepath)
    - :heavy_plus_sign: For [parsing a path](https://nodejs.org/api/path.html#pathparsepath) into its significant elements, trailing slashes are not preserved
- :heavy_plus_sign: Nix's builtin function `dirOf` gives an unexpected result for paths with trailing slashes: `dirOf "foo/bar/" == "foo/bar"`.
  Inconsistently, `baseNameOf` works correctly though: `baseNameOf "foo/bar/" == "bar"`.
  - :heavy_minus_sign: We are writing a path library to improve handling of paths though, so we shouldn't use these functions and discourage their use
- :heavy_minus_sign: Unexpected result when normalising intermediate paths, like `normalise ("foo" + "/") + "bar" == "foobar"`

>   - :heavy_plus_sign: Does this have a real use case?

Author: I'm changing it to

> This is not a practical use case though

  - :heavy_plus_sign: Don't use `+` to append paths, this library has a `join` function for that
    - :heavy_minus_sign: Users might use `+` out of habit though
- :heavy_plus_sign: The `realpath` command also removes trailing slashes
- :heavy_plus_sign: Even with a trailing slash, the path is the same, it's only an indication that it's a directory
- :heavy_plus_sign: Normalisation should return the same string when we know it's the same path, so removing the slash.

>   This way we can use the result as an attribute key.

Author: I removed this in a commit now, but the idea was that e.g.

```nix
{
  environment.etc."some/file.conf".source = foo;
}
```

and

```nix
{
  environment.etc."some/file.conf/".source = bar;
}
```

should trigger an eval-time error because the same path is assigned twice.

# Path library design

This document documents why the `lib.path` library is designed the way it is.

The purpose of this library is to process paths. It does not read files from the filesystem.
It exists to support the native Nix path value type with extra functionality.

Since the path value type implicitly imports paths from the "eval-time system" into the store,
this library explicitly doesn't support build-time or run-time paths, including paths to derivations.

> Overall, this library works with two basic forms of paths:

Reviewer 2: Are there non-basic forms of paths?
```suggestion
Overall, this library works with two types of paths:
```

> - Absolute paths are represented with the Nix path value type. Nix automatically normalises these paths.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Absolute paths are represented with the Nix [path value type]. Nix automatically normalises these paths.
```

> - Subpaths are represented with the string value type. This library normalises these paths as safely as possible. In the end, subpaths are intended to be used to refer to a specific file/directory nested in an absolute base directory. Subpaths are a more strict form of relative paths, notably [without supporting `..` references](#parents).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Subpaths are represented with the [string value type]. This library normalises these paths as safely as possible.

  A subpath refers to a specific file or directory within an absolute base directory.
  It is a stricter form of a relative path, which notably must not start with `/` and [does not support `..` components](#parents).
```

> 
> Notably absolute paths in a string value type are not supported, the use of the string value type for subpaths is only because the path value type doesn't support subpaths.

Reviewer 2: That can be put briefly in the sentence above.
```suggestion
```

This library is designed to be as safe and intuitive as possible, throwing errors when operations are attempted that would produce surprising results, and giving the expected result otherwise.

> This library is designed to work well as a dependency for the `lib.filesystem` and `lib.sources` library components. Contrary to these library components, `lib.path` is designed to not read any paths from the filesystem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This library is designed to work well as a dependency for the `lib.filesystem` and `lib.sources` library components. Contrary to these library components, `lib.path` does not read any paths from the filesystem.
```

This library makes only these assumptions about paths and no others:
- `dirOf path` returns the path to the parent directory of `path`, unless `path` is the filesystem root, in which case `path` is returned
  - There can be multiple filesystem roots: `p == dirOf p` and `q == dirOf q` does not imply `p == q`
    - While there's only a single filesystem root in stable Nix, the [lazy trees PR](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/6530) introduces [additional filesystem roots](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/6530#discussion_r1041442173)
- `path + ("/" + string)` returns the path to the `string` subdirectory in `path`
  - If `string` contains no `/` characters, then `dirOf (path + ("/" + string)) == path`
  - If `string` contains no `/` characters, then `baseNameOf (path + ("/" + string)) == string`
- `path1 == path2` returns true only if `path1` points to the same filesystem path as `path2`

Notably we do not make the assumption that we can turn paths into strings using `toString path`.

## Design decisions

Each subsection here contains a decision along with arguments and counter-arguments for (+) and against (-) that decision.

> ### Leading dots for subpaths
> [leading-dots]: #leading-dots-for-subpaths

Reviewer 2: The arguments all apply to relative paths, too.

```suggestion
### Leading dots for relative paths
[leading-dots]: #leading-dots
```
